In Java, type casting is the conversion of a variable from one data type to another. The two types are implicit casting (automatic, safe) and explicit casting (manual, potentially unsafe). 
Implicit Casting (Widening Conversion)
Implicit casting (also known as widening or automatic conversion) is performed automatically by the Java compiler when converting a smaller data type to a larger one. 
Process: No special syntax is required; the conversion happens automatically.
Safety: It is always safe because the larger type has enough memory to hold the entire range of values from the smaller type, so there is no risk of data loss.
Order (smallest to largest): byte -> short -> char -> int -> long -> float -> double. 
Example:
java
int myInt = 10;
double myDouble = myInt; // Implicit casting from int to double
System.out.println(myDouble); // Output: 10.0
In this case, the int value 10 is automatically converted to the double value 10.0. 
Explicit Casting (Narrowing Conversion)
Explicit casting (also known as narrowing or manual conversion) is required when converting a larger data type to a smaller one. This process is not automatic because it can lead to data loss or a loss of precision. 
Process: The programmer must manually use the cast operator (type) to explicitly tell the compiler to perform the conversion.
Safety: It is potentially unsafe. Data loss can occur (e.g., losing the decimal part of a floating-point number, or an overflow if the value is outside the target type's range).
Order (largest to smallest): double -> float -> long -> int -> char -> short -> byte. 
Example:
java
double myDouble = 9.78;
int myInt = (int) myDouble; // Explicit casting from double to int
System.out.println(myInt); // Output: 9
Here, the decimal part (.78) is truncated, and the int variable only stores the whole number 9. 
Summary of Differences
Feature 	Implicit Casting	Explicit Casting
Also Known As	Widening, Automatic Conversion	Narrowing, Manual Conversion
Direction	Smaller type to larger type	Larger type to smaller type
Syntax	No special syntax required	Requires the (type) cast operator
Data Loss Risk	None, it is safe	Yes, data or precision loss can occur
Compiler Action	Done automatically by the compiler	Requires manual instruction from the programmer
Casting with Objects
Type casting also applies to objects within an inheritance hierarchy: 
Upcasting: Converting a subclass reference to a superclass reference is safe and happens implicitly.
Downcasting: Converting a superclass reference back to a subclass reference must be done explicitly using the cast operator and the instanceof operator should be used to prevent a ClassCastException at runtime. 